📘 Fundamentals of Programming – (Java vs Python)
1. Program

A program is a set of instructions written to perform a specific task.

It tells the computer what to do step by step.

Java → Needs to be written inside a class and compiled first, then run using JVM (Java Virtual Machine).

Python → Can be written directly in a file or interpreter, no compilation needed (interpreted language).

🔹 Key Difference:
Java is compiled + run, while Python is directly executed.

2. Source Code

The instructions written by the programmer in a programming language are called source code.

It is human-readable and stored in files (like .py,.java).

Java → Written in .java files. After compilation, .class files are generated.

Python → Written in .py files. Code runs directly using Python interpreter.

3. Compiler & Interpreter

Compiler: Translates the whole program into machine code at once. Faster execution but takes time to compile (used in C, C++, Java).

Interpreter: Translates and executes the program line by line. Easier for beginners but slower (used in Python, JavaScript).

Java → Uses both. Code is compiled into bytecode (.class) and then executed by the JVM.

Python → Purely interpreted, executed line by line by the Python interpreter.

4. Variables

A variable is a name given to a memory location where data is stored.

The value of a variable can change during the execution of the program.

Example: storing a student’s name, age, or marks in variables

Java → Strongly typed. You must declare variable type before using it.

Example: int age = 20;

Python → Dynamically typed. You just assign a value; type is decided automatically.

Example: age = 20

🔹 Key Difference:
Java needs type declaration, Python does not.

5. Data Types

Java (primitive + objects):

byte, short, int, float, double, char, boolean, String (object).

Python (everything is object):

int, float, str, bool, list, tuple, dict.

6. Input and Output

Java →

Input → Scanner sc = new Scanner(System.in);

Output → System.out.println("Hello");

Python →

Input → input("Enter: ")

Output → print("Hello")

7. Keywords

Java → ~50 reserved words like int, class, public, static, void.

Python → ~35 reserved words like def, class, if, else, import.

8. Conditional Statements
Conditional statements allow the program to make decisions based on conditions.

Types:

If Statement → Executes a block of code only if a condition is true.

If-Else Statement → Executes one block if the condition is true, another if it is false.

If-Else If Ladder → Used when multiple conditions must be checked one after another.

Java → Needs parentheses and braces {}.

9. Switch Statement

A switch statement is used when a variable needs to be compared with many possible values.

Instead of writing multiple if-else statements, switch provides a cleaner structure.

Example in real life:

If day = 1 → Monday

If day = 2 → Tuesday

Else → Other day

Java → Has switch keyword. Used widely.

switch(day) {
    case 1: System.out.println("Monday"); break;
    case 2: System.out.println("Tuesday"); break;
    default: System.out.println("Other");
}


Python → No direct switch, but match-case introduced in Python 3.10.

match day:
    case 1: print("Monday")
    case 2: print("Tuesday")
    case _: print("Other")